# Cognitive Resonance


## Introduction

## Cognitive Dissonance and Resonance

### What is Cognitive Dissonance
Wikipedia gives a good introduction so let me just copy it here:
"In the field of psychology, cognitive dissonance occurs when a person holds contradictory beliefs, ideas, or values, and is typically experienced as psychological stress when they participate in an action that goes against one or more of them. According to this theory, when two actions or ideas are not psychologically consistent with each other, people do all in their power to change them until they become consistent. The discomfort is triggered by the person's belief clashing with new information perceived, wherein they try to find a way to resolve the contradiction to reduce their discomfort."

The ways of resolving dissonances is an important topic on its own and we will come back to it later. For now let's focus on how dissonance emerges in the first place:

### Where dissonance comes from
Since cognitive dissonance comes from contradictory beliefs, ideas, or values it comes from where you aquire those beliefs, ideas, or values, which is basicly your whole life: It might be as fundamental as your religious upbringing not being consistent with evolution or as trivial as expecting your favourite sports team to win and witnessing the opposite (though fans would probably argue that latter is the fundamental one). Also political views can be a big source of dissonance for example when they don't match with the demogrpahic statistics or with the proposed views of the other party.

### The case for Cognitive Resonance
Cognitive Resonance now at first climpse is simply the opppsite to dissonance: Your beliefs, values and ideas are aligned and support each other. But actually I don't think its just the trivial opposite, there exist several good reasons why it's helpful:
1. **Non-dissonant is not necessarily resonant**: Only because your believes and ideas are not contradictory doesn't mean they are resonant, they could simply be independent: Reasons why your favourite basketball team is the best probably don't contradict with your understanding of quantum physics.
2. **No dissonance should only be a subgoal**: Trying to achieve minimal cognitive dissonance is desireable but can also be achieved by not having believes and values at all or by living in your own bubble ignoring everything that is dissonant. The latter approach for reducing your cognitive dissonance and with that your comfort is the reason why biases and discrimination exists.
3. **Resonance should be the goal**: Maximizing resonance implies reducing dissonance as a subgoal but also motivates why we should stay curious and open minded. From the perspective of minimizing dissonance, curiosity is just a potential source of new dissonance, but with the perspective of maximizing resonance, curiosity holds the potential to integrate and resonate with even more parts of reality.

To me the concept of cognitive resonance seems fundamental to understand the human condition, or rather the "cognitive agent condition". Don't take my word for it though, rather use your personal resonance and dissonance as the measure of truth. I'm curious about your feedback be it motivated by agreement or contradiction.

### How to think of your mind
For things to make sense we need good ways of thinking about them. Perspectives, analogies and connections which help our believes and ideas to resonate: Cognitive resonance/dissonance is a quite general concept which is useful in psychology to explain behavior, cognitive processes and biases. But I like it so much because it can also easily make sense from a neurological and technical perspective: Marvin Minsky imagined the mind not as a singular construct but as a society which works together to form ministries that are responsible for dealing with different aspects of reality or solving different problems. Analogly I am imagining the brain as a collective of many neural systems that work together to make sense of the world. One system for example is the visual cortex responsible for processing what we perceive with our eyes. This visual system has itself many specialized subsystems for different important aspects of vision: One for example is resposible for detecting faces and making sense of facial expressions, while another is highly sensitive for movements in your peripheral vision. Many if not all systems work together, the vision system for example works together with systems responsible for movement to allow your hand eye coordination, or when your friend talks about a recent experience and you simultaniously imagine the situation in your head: Your auditive system encoded the information but your visual system used it to run a simulation to see if you can also understand it visually. This might make it easier to imagine how your friend felt during the experience.
If your systems work well together, in other words if you can achieve high cognitive resonance, you are using your cognitive processing capability more effectively.

[Attention?]

We can also imagine this on a almost cellular level: A neural (sub) system is a group of neurons that coordinate their firing with each other. Together they produce a certain activity pattern which encodes some information. Of course multiple such neuron groups can also be interconnected. How effectively they share information between each other depends on how synchronized their spike firings are and on the compatibility of their activity patterns. I like to imagine it similar to constructive and destructive interference between waves, which have the highest resonance if their phases and frequencies match.

## Your two main systems
Now that we have some concepts and imaginations on how our cognition works we can have a closer look on which main neural systems are actually important to understand ourselfs: There seem to exist two meta systems which enable quite different ways of thinking: They were scientifically discovered and analyized by Daniel Kahnemann and he called them system 1 and system 2, responsible for "fast thinking" and "slow thinking" respectively. It might be a oversimplification but I think we are already familiar with those systems from our everyday lives where we call system 1 "intuition" and system 2 "analytical thinking". Your intuition gives you a first, fast and effortless assesment within an experience. Your analytical thinking can then be used to further refine your first perception or compare it explicitly with other situations or use conscious reasoning to make further sense of the world. Your intuition can be used to automate tasks, like driving your bike home from work while imagining your delicious dinner but can also be used more consciously for example to make complex life decisions like choosing your study subject or your partner. Your analytical thinking is always conscious and requires concentration and attention. With your analytical mind you are mostly aware of how and what exactly you are thinking and you are able to freely form whatever thought you like. Intuition in contrast is built through experience and is hard to influence directly. It is based on patterns and similarities between previous experiences and thoughts and projects them into a feeling, which can be highly entangled and hard to analyze. 

### Compass and Map
Intuition is sometimes called "inner compass" which is a very good analogy and the matching analogy for the analytical mind is the map: If you have a good map and know exactly where you and your goal are located you can simply follow the paths on the map. It's like following a recipy or executing an exact algorithm. But if some parts of your map are still undiscovered your compass becomes very handy. It guides your exploration through and into the unknown.
Navigating by compass means listening to your feelings: Your intuition shows which direction 'feels good or right' but straightly following it might mean crossing rivers and fighting yourself through dark forests and up high mountains only to descent it again on the other side and when you reached your destination you might not know the way back home.
Navigating by map lets you reach already known places easily and reliably but exploration is limited to your maps frontier and without orientiation: Where should the next insightful adventure start and go to? You might know your maps frontier well but it will be mostly trial and error to find promising directions for expanding your map.
The best adventures are possible when combining the best of both worlds: Following your intuition into the unknown but building a map on the way to document your journey, which will make it easy to backtrack your steps if you get lost. Your compass also helps to orientate and puzzle together multiple maps: Understanding which direction leaving one map leads you into another makes it possible to realize that you left the area of your first map but already entered the next one which might show you that the canyon blocking your path can be crossed with a bridge just after the next hill.

### Navigation Biases
It seems like the two ways to navigate your life could be used together for the best or most succesful journey but because they are quite different from each other they can easily feel incompatible and lead to dissonance. Typically both systems are not evenly balanced and one of them proofed more effective or efficient for the majority of navigation required in your life. This might lead to some biases towards the other way of thinking:

From the perspective of your analytical mind your intuition can seem unreliable, hard to reproduce and not precise. It can distract you from a clean navigation inside your maps and seems only to be a plan B if your maps fail.

From the perspective of your intuition your analytical thinking can seem cold, repetitive, boring, exhausting and too static to deal with a dynamic world. Why try harding to analyze everything when you can just go with the flow?

These sources of dissonance come from expecting the strengths of one system from the other and being dissapointed from their weaknesses. It also comes from trying to use the one system for the same things and in the same way the other system works. Focusing on their strengths instead and on how they complement each other will make resonance possible. But like all biases these "wrong expectations" about the other way of thinking are hiding unconscious in plain sight in what we currently think is the best or right way to navigate.

## Two Realities